The University of Limerick (UL) (Irish: Olscoil Luimnigh) is a higher
education institution in Limerick, Ireland. Founded in 1972 as the National Institute
for Higher Education. Limerick, it became a university in 1989 in accordance with
the University of Limerick Act 1989 l Iit was the first university established since Irish
independence in 1922, followed by the establishment of Dublin City University later
the same day
UL's campus lies along both sides of the River Shannon, on a 137.5-hectare (340-
acre) site with 46 hectares (110 acres) on the north bank and 91.5 hectares (226
acres) on the south bank, 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) from the city centre, It has over
11,000 full-time undergraduate students including over 2,400 international
students, and 1,500 part-time students. There are over B00 research
postgraduates and 1,300 postgraduate students receiving instruction at the
university. Its co-operative education ("co-op") programme offers students an eight-
month work placement as part of their degree; it was Ireland's first such programme.
Following founding president Edward M. Walsh, Roger GH Downer, John O'Connor,
Don Barry and Des Fitzgerald were presidents of UL from 1998 to August
2020 The current, interim, president is Professor Kerstin Mey.
Robert Cive was awarded an Irish peerage in 1762, being created Baron Clive of
Plassey, County Clare, he bought lands in County Limerick and County Clare,
Ireland, naming part of his lands near Limerick City, Plassey. Following Irish
independence, these lands became state property. In the 1970s a technical college,
which later became the University of Limerick, was built at Plassey.
According to founding president Edward M. Walsh the mayor of Limerick applied
for a Queen's Collegelil in the city in 1845; however, Belfast, Cork and Galway were
established instead. In 1908 there was an attempt to link the National University of
Ireland and Mungret College, about five kilometres from Limerick. Mungret offered
bachelor's- and master's-level courses in the faculty of arts, with degrees conferred
by the Royal University of Ireland, from 1888 to 1908. The university was dissolved
in 1909 and replaced by the National University of Ireland, marking the end of tertiary
education at Mungret. Degrees were awarded to students at Mungret College by the
NUI from 1909 to 1912 to accommodate students who had matriculated at the Royal
University.
The campaign for a university in Limerick began in earnest by the late 1950s. The
Limerick University Project Committee was founded in September 1959 by the
mayor of Limerick in 1957, Ted Russell. Another supporter, Dermet Kinlen, was
a High Court judge and the first state inspector general of prisons and places of
detention. Russell and Kinlen received honorary degrees from the university in 2002.
Successful economic-development policies during the 1960s led to an influx of
foreign investment in Ireland and demand for expertise not met by the existing
universities. Ireland established the National Institute for Higher Education (NIHE) at
Limerick, modelled on the technological universities of continental Europe, and
perhaps the polytechnic approach being developed in the UK, lainad Edward
Walsh took office as chairman of the planning board and director of the institute on 1
January 1970.1k This more twentieth-century and continental approach is illustrated
by its use of funding from the Workd Bank, European Investment Bank and
philanthropists. Construction on phase one, for example, used financing from the
World Bank. Far
and staff were recruited internationally, and they - in addition
to extensive teaching and research facilities - attracted foreign investment led
by Analog Devices (which manufactured Ireland's first silicon chips).
The first students were enrolled in 1972, when the institute was opened
by Taoiseach Jack Lynch. The European Investment Bank financed the second
phase of development. Billionaire philanthropist Chuck Feeney was a major donor to
the university. Shannon Development was also an early supporter of the project,
supporting the NIHE proposal to establish the National Technological Park15 as an
integrated campus.
A change of govemment resulted in NIHE Limerick applying for recognition as a
recognised college of the National University of Ireland, which awarded degrees to
its graduates in 1977. After strong opposition by students and others, NIHE Limerick
withdrew from the NUI and was established as an independent institution. From
1978 to 1988, the National Council for Educational Awards (NCEA) was the degree-
awarding authority for NIHE Limerick.
In 1989, NIHE Limerick was established by legislation as the University of
Limerick and NIHE Dublin was established as Dublin City University, each with the
power to award its own degrees. These became the first institutes since Irish
independence to be given the title "university".4
Expansion occurred in 1991, after the incorporation of Thomond College of
Education. Limerick. Thomond, sharing a common campus, was founded in 1973 as
the National College of Physical Education and became the department of
educational and professional studies, focusing on secondary education. Since 1991,
degrees from Mary Immaculate College, Limerick have also been awarded by
UL 15 MIC degrees are offered in primary education and arts programmes, and
degrees awarded at St. Patrick's College, Thurles have been conferred by UL since
2012.1812 University history under the leadership of founding president Edward M
Walsh is profiled in Walsh's 2011 memoir, Upstart. Friends, Foes and Founding a
University.
Elements of the US university system were adopted, including cooperative
education, grade point average marking and the trimester system During the 1970s,
limited public financing led Walsh and his team to seek World Bank and European
Investment Bank funding. Sophisticated private-sector fundraising programmes were
later developed, based on US university models and guided by an international
leadership board under founding chair Chuck Feeney and Lewis Glucksman. The
campus developed primarily as a result of such fundraising activity a.oeded
The university has been an active participant in the European Union's Erasmus
Programme since 1988 and has 207 partner institutions in 24 European countries. In
addition, UL students may study at partner universities in the US, Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, Brazil, China and Singapore.
Kemmy Business School has four academic departments, which are Accounting &
Finance, Economics, Management & Marketing, and Personnel & Employment
Relations. The school's courses include accounting, finance, economics, marketing,
and risk management among other courses. The Kemmy Business School is the first
European university to have a custom-designed campus trading floor, which uses
the trading software Bloomberg Professional. Through the Kemmy school, students
have the option of completing the Bloomberg certification. Named after the
former mayor of Limerick, Jim Kemmy, the business school has both undergraduate
and postgraduate courses on offer.
UL has a students' union, representing the student body. It is presided over by
three sabbatical officers: a president, an academic officer and a welfare officer.
Policy decisions are made by the sabbatical officers and the class representation
council.
ULSU is the representative body for the 13,500 UL students. The union operates
from their office in the main courtyard, which has been refurbished and provides a
place for students to relax throughout the day. ULSU Ents, part of the students'
union, organises entertainment for university students throughout the year. Most take
place during Freshers Week and Charity Week.
The university also has a postgraduate students' union with a full-time, sabbatical
postgraduate president representing the postgraduate student body. It is one of two
Irish universities with such a position.
UL has over 70 student-run clubs and societies. Clubs are supported by the
students' union, the sports department and the arts office. In March 2014, the clubs
and societies refused to recognise the Pro-Life Society-the first25) society not
recognised by the student council. 26] Since then, every new club or society must be
voted on by the council and undergo a trial period (usually 14 weeks).
